Minimum viable module source (#36)
tc39/proposal-import-reflection: README.md

> # Import Source Reflection

Reviewer: Let's rename to `Source Phase Imports`?

Author: I've come around on the `Reflection` term finally - in fact the `ModuleSource` option is defined in the `Reflection` section now. The `ModuleSource` once it has bindings will truly be a reflective data type. `Import Source Reflection` allows us to somewhat salvage the original name.

Reviewer: I think it's confusing still. I'd prefer "phase".

Author: Sure, `Source Phase Imports` makes sense, and but strictly speaking, we are treating `ModuleSource` as a reflection object now.

Reviewer 2: I prefer to reserve `Reflection` for the proposal that makes module sources reflect the parsed bindings. I propose that `Source Phase Imports` is clearer for this layer.

const x = await import("<specifier>", { phase: "source" });
```

> For dynamic imports, import phase is specified as a separate `phase` key in the options object to dyamic import, similar to how [import attributes][] use the `attributes` key.

Reviewer 2: Not the `"with"` key?

Author: Thanks will fix.

```

For dynamic imports, import phase is specified in the same second
attribute options bag that [import attributes][] are specified in, using the

> `phase` key.

Reviewer: It is not immediately clear from this sentence that `phase` is not _within_ the attributes bag. Maybe rephrase or add an example?

Author: There is an example before, but I've updated the wording to be clearer.

### Defining Module Source

The object provided by the module source phase should have a prototype set to the

> `%AbtractModuleSourcePrototype%` object, defined by this specification to be a minimal

Reviewer 2: `Abstract` may be an unnecessary qualifier in this name, since this is to be or become the value of `ModuleSource.prototype` (or `ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__`? Is the intention to allow `ModuleSource.prototype` to be the seat of JavaScript specific features and `ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__ === %AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%`?).

I know we can brand-check module sources by `Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(ModuleSource.prototype, Symbol.toStringTag).get.call(subject) !== undefined`, but can one check whether something is an `instanceof` an abstract module source? I think that’s not possible without an abstract module source constructor, like `subject instanceof AbstractModuleSource`, or rather `subject instanceof ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__.constructor`.

Author: @kriskowal yes and yes. So `ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__ === %AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%` and `Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__, Symbol.toStringTag).get.call(subject) !== undefined` and there's no `AbstractModuleSource` constructor to check.

I'm open to making `AbstractModuleSource` more explicit with a constructor.

Reviewer 2: I don’t think we need a `globalThis.AbstractModuleSource === %AbstractModuleSourceConstructor%` and I think it’s sufficient for:
- `globalThis.ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__ === %AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%`,
- `%AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%.constructor === %AbstractModuleSourceConstructor%`, and
- `%AbstractModuleSourceConstructor%.prototype === %AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%`,
such that `subject instanceof ModuleSource.prototype.__proto__.constructor` can discriminate module source instances with only slightly less fidelity than a brand check.

Author: Sure, I can add an AbstractModuleSource constructor for this kind of check at least.

Author: I've added an AbstractModuleSource constructor in the latest commit.

> The object provided by the module source phase should have a prototype set to the
> `%AbtractModuleSourcePrototype%` object, defined by this specification to be a minimal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The object provided by the module source phase must be an object that inherits the
`%AbtractModuleSourcePrototype%` object prototypically, defined by this specification to be a minimal
```

Reviewer 2: Or “must be an object with `%AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%` in its chain of prototypes”.

shared base prototype for a compiled modular resource.

In addition we define the `sourceType` getter returning the type string

> corresponding to the name of the specific module source subclass.

Reviewer 2: I believe we’re converging on omitting this in favor of an `Symbol.toStringTag` getter on the `%AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%` that is sufficient to distinguish the module source brand and also differentiate implementations by consulting internal slots. A `toStringTag` of `"ModuleSource"` would imply source text for this language, as opposed to `"WebAssembly.Module"`.

For purposes of consensus, I am not picky about these particulars. None of the motivating use cases I am tracking require a brand check or module source type reflection. Module source objects can be opaque tokens for import virtualization and only need to reveal their language-agnostic `bindings` for loader virtualization, bundling, or import graph analysis.

Author: Thanks, this was also missed in the refactor.

### JS Module Source

For JavaScript modules, the module source phase is then specified to return

> a `ModuleSource` object, representing an ECMAScript Module Source.

Reviewer 2: Is this the intention?
```suggestion
a `ModuleSource` object, representing an ECMAScript Module Source.
The `ModuleSource.prototype` is a `%ModuleSourcePrototype%`.
The `[[Proto]]` of `%ModuleSourcePrototype%` is `%AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%`.
```

Future proposals may then add support for [bindings lookup methods][],
the [ModuleSource constructor][] and [instantiation][] support.

New properties may be added to the base `AbstractModuleSourcePrototype`, or shared
with ECMAScript module sources via `ModuleSource.prototype` additions.

### Wasm Module Source

> For WebAssembly modules, the existing `WebAssembly.Module.prototype` object is to be
> updated to have a prototype value of `AbstractModuleSourcePrototype` in the

Reviewer 2: Is this the intent?
```suggestion
For WebAssembly modules, the existing `WebAssembly.Module.prototype` object is to be
updated to have a `[[Proto]]` of `AbstractModuleSourcePrototype` in the
```

### Defining Module Source

> The object provided by the module source phase must have a prototype set to the
> `ModuleSourcePrototype` object, defined by this specification to be a minimal
> shared base prototype for a compiled modular resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The object provided by the module source phase should have a prototype set to the
`%AbtractModuleSourcePrototype%` object, defined by this specification to be a minimal
shared base prototype for a compiled modular resource.
```

> The object provided by the module source phase must have a prototype set to the
> `ModuleSourcePrototype` object, defined by this specification to be a minimal
> shared base prototype for a compiled modular resource.
> 
> In addition we define the `sourceType` getter returning the type string
> corresponding to the name of the specific module source subclass.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The object provided by the module source phase must have a the
`AbstractModuleSourcePrototype` object in its prototype chain, defined by this
specification to be a minimal shared base prototype for a compiled modular resource.
```

Reviewer: Also include something along the lines of:

For now, the `%AbtractModuleSourcePrototype%` contains only a `@toStringTag` getter.

### JS Module Source

For JavaScript modules, the module source phase is then specified to return
a `ModuleSource` object, representing an ECMAScript Module Source.

> It's `sourceType` value would be `"source-text"`.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Future proposals may then add support for [bindings lookup methods][],
the [ModuleSource constructor][] and [instantiation][] support.

> New properties may be added to the base `ModuleSourcePrototype`, or shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New properties may be added to the base `%AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%`, or shared
```

> New properties may be added to the base `ModuleSourcePrototype`, or shared
> with ECMASCript module sources via `ModuleSource` additions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
New properties may be added to the base `AbstractModuleSourcePrototype`, or shared
with ECMAScript module sources via `ModuleSource.prototype` additions.
```

For WebAssembly modules, the existing `WebAssembly.Module` object is to be

> updated to be a subclass of `AbstractModuleSource` in the

Reviewer 2: I don’t see `AbstractModuleSource` here. Should there be a reference? I’m looking for the object graph you propose so one can walk by property from `globalThis` to `AbstractModuleSource`. I assume directly and that `ModuleSource` is a subclass, or prefer entirely for æsthetic reasons that I hold lightly, the omission of `AbstractModuleSource` in favor of `globalThis.ModuleSource` serving as both the base class for all language module sources and also the JavaScript module source. I will be satisfied for purposes of review by either detail.

Author: I originally had an explicit `AbstractModuleSource`, but then saw we have existing precedent for prototype objects which are not themselves constructors (intrinsics ending in `Prototype`), so thought we could try that model instead.

So the chain is now effectively:

```js
global.ModuleSource = function ModuleSource () {
  throw new Error('unimplemented');
}
ModuleSource.prototype = ModuleSourcePrototype;
```

where ModuleSourcePrototype is then just defined as an object.

Reviewer 2: That’s fine too, though prototypes usually participate in a `constructor.prototype` property cycle.

> For WebAssembly modules, the existing `WebAssembly.Module` object is to be
> updated to have a prototype value of `ModuleSourcePrototype` in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For WebAssembly modules, the existing `WebAssembly.Module.prototype` object is to be
updated to have a prototype value of `AbstractModuleSourcePrototype` in the
```

### Defining Module Source

The object provided by the module source phase must be a subclass of the
`AbstractModuleSource` object, defined by this specification to be a minimal
object representation for a compiled modular resource.

### JS Module Source

For JavaScript modules, the module source phase is then specified to return
a `ModuleSource` object:

```
class ModuleSource extends AbstractModuleSource {
  constructor () {
    throw new Error();
  }
  get [Symbol.toStringTag] () {

>     if (this instanceof ModuleSource)

Reviewer 4: the semantics should match a private field, and testing whether that field is `in this`, rather than `instanceof`.

also, shouldn't this be defined in AbstractModuleSource, and the ModuleSource implementation more look like:
```js
#kind = 'ModuleSource'
```
thus deferring everything to the AbstractModuleSource getter?

Author: I've changed the check in `Symbol.toStringTag` for `ModuleSource` to explicitly verify the host internal slot of `[[HostSourceData]]`.

For JavaScript modules, the module source phase is then specified to return
a `ModuleSource` object, representing an ECMAScript Module Source.

> The `ModuleSource.prototype` is a `%ModuleSourcePrototype%`.

Reviewer 4: nit: p sure neither of these should have articles
```suggestion
`ModuleSource.prototype` is `%ModuleSourcePrototype%`.
```

Author: I think I already covered this.

### Other Module Types

> Any other host-defined module types may define their own host module sources. If a given module does not define a source representation for it's source, importing it with a "source" phase target fails.

Reviewer 2: Suggest:

Host-defined module sources must include `%AbstractModuleSourcePrototype%` in their prototype chain and support the *necessary internal slots for revealing their `toString` tag to a brand check, the underlying module source record, and host data*

Author: Thanks, added along these lines.

### Other Module Types

> Any other host-defined module types may define their own host module sources. If no module phase import is defined, it will fail during the loading phase.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't seem clear. Maybe:

```suggestion
Any other host-defined module types may define their own host module sources. If a given module does not define a source representation for it's source, importing it with a "source" phase target fails.
```

Author: Sounds good, thanks!

    https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy
[ECMA-262 ES modules HostLoadImportedModule refactoring]:
    https://github.com/tc39/ecma262/pull/2905

> [ModuleSource constructor]: 

Reviewer 3: Is this link missing the URL?
